Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station:
the autonomic nervous system. I shall take the candidate through it,
question by question. Let us begin.
Describe the organisation of the autonomic nervous system.
The autonomic nervous system is the division of the nervous system that controls
the involuntary functions of the body — the viscera,
the vessels and the glands — maintaining the internal environment,
and its organisation into two divisions with a characteristic two-neuron
arrangement is fundamental, so it is worth setting out.
The autonomic nervous system is the motor system to the involuntary effectors:
the cardiac and smooth muscle and the glands.
It operates largely automatically, below consciousness,
to regulate the internal environment — the circulation, the gut,
the bladder and so on.
It has two divisions, the sympathetic and the parasympathetic,
which are largely anatomically and functionally distinct and often opposing.
A characteristic feature is that the pathway from the central nervous system to the
effector involves two neurons in series, not one: a preganglionic neuron,
from the central nervous system to a peripheral ganglion, where it synapses;
and a postganglionic neuron, from the ganglion to the effector — unlike the somatic
system, with its single motor neuron.
The two divisions differ in the location of their outflow from the central nervous
system and of their ganglia. There is also an enteric nervous system,
the intrinsic nervous system of the gut.
So the autonomic nervous system controls the involuntary effectors — cardiac and
smooth muscle and glands — to regulate the internal environment;
organised into the sympathetic and parasympathetic divisions,
with a two-neuron pathway — preganglionic to a ganglion,
postganglionic to the effector — and an enteric division in the gut;
an organisation fundamental to autonomic control.
Describe the anatomy of the sympathetic and parasympathetic divisions.
The sympathetic and parasympathetic divisions differ characteristically in their
anatomy — in where they leave the central nervous system and in the position of
their ganglia — and these anatomical differences underlie their different patterns
of action, so they are worth describing.
The sympathetic division has a thoracolumbar outflow:
its preganglionic neurons arise from the thoracic and upper lumbar segments of the
spinal cord.
Its ganglia lie close to the cord — in the paired sympathetic chains alongside the
vertebral column, and in some prevertebral ganglia — so the preganglionic fibres
are short and the postganglionic fibres long.
This arrangement, with the chains linking the ganglia,
allows the sympathetic discharge to be widespread and diffuse.
The adrenal medulla is a modified sympathetic ganglion.
The parasympathetic division has a craniosacral outflow:
its preganglionic neurons arise from certain cranial nerves — importantly the vagus
— and from the sacral segments of the cord.
Its ganglia lie close to, or within, the effector organs,
so the preganglionic fibres are long and the postganglionic fibres short.
This arrangement allows a more discrete, localised action.
So the sympathetic division has a thoracolumbar outflow with ganglia near the cord
in the sympathetic chains — short preganglionic, long postganglionic fibres,
allowing a diffuse discharge; while the parasympathetic has a craniosacral outflow,
through the vagus and sacral nerves,
with ganglia in or near the effectors — long preganglionic,
short postganglionic fibres, allowing discrete action;
anatomical differences underlying their different patterns of action.
Describe the neurotransmitters and receptors of the autonomic nervous system.
The actions of the autonomic nervous system depend on its neurotransmitters and
their receptors, and a clear grasp of which transmitter and receptor are used at
each point is essential, both to understand its function and because so many drugs
act here, so it is worth setting out carefully.
The two-neuron pathway has two synapses, using transmitters as follows.
At the ganglion — the synapse between the pre- and postganglionic neurons — the
transmitter, in both divisions, is acetylcholine, acting on nicotinic receptors.
At the effector — the postganglionic ending — the divisions differ.
The parasympathetic postganglionic neurons release acetylcholine,
acting on muscarinic receptors on the effector.
The sympathetic postganglionic neurons mostly release noradrenaline,
acting on adrenoceptors — the alpha and beta receptors, of various subtypes,
with different effects in different tissues;
the exception is the sympathetic supply to the sweat glands, which is cholinergic.
The adrenal medulla, a modified sympathetic ganglion,
releases adrenaline and noradrenaline into the blood as hormones.
So the autonomic transmitters and receptors are: at all ganglia,
acetylcholine on nicotinic receptors; at the parasympathetic effector,
acetylcholine on muscarinic receptors; at the sympathetic effector,
noradrenaline on alpha and beta adrenoceptors — except the cholinergic sweat
glands; and the adrenal medulla releasing adrenaline into the blood — a scheme
essential to autonomic function and to the many drugs acting at these sites.
Describe the actions of the sympathetic nervous system.
The sympathetic nervous system produces a coordinated pattern of effects throughout
the body, classically summarised as the fight-or-flight response,
preparing the body for vigorous activity,
and knowing its actions on the main organs is important.
The sympathetic system is activated in situations of stress, exertion,
fear and emergency, and it produces a widespread,
coordinated response that mobilises the body for action — the fight-or-flight
response.
Its effects on the principal systems are: on the heart,
an increase in the rate and force of contraction, increasing the cardiac output;
on the circulation, vasoconstriction in the skin, gut and kidneys, diverting blood,
with vasodilatation in the exercising muscle,
and an overall rise in blood pressure; on the lungs, dilatation of the bronchi,
easing breathing; on the eyes, dilatation of the pupil; on metabolism,
the mobilisation of energy stores — the breakdown of glycogen and fat,
raising the blood glucose; on the gut and bladder, inhibition of their activity,
as digestion and excretion are not priorities.
These effects are mediated by the noradrenaline released from the sympathetic
nerves and the adrenaline from the adrenal medulla, acting on the adrenoceptors,
and they are deployed widely and together, owing to the diffuse organisation.
So the sympathetic system, activated in stress and exertion,
produces the fight-or-flight response: increasing the heart rate and force,
redistributing the blood with an overall vasoconstriction and raised pressure,
dilating the bronchi and pupils, mobilising energy stores,
and inhibiting the gut and bladder — a widespread,
coordinated preparation of the body for vigorous activity,
mediated by noradrenaline and adrenaline on adrenoceptors.
Describe the actions of the parasympathetic nervous system.
The parasympathetic nervous system produces effects that are, broadly,
the opposite of the sympathetic, concerned with rest,
recovery and the routine maintenance of the body,
classically summarised as rest-and-digest,
and its actions are worth setting out alongside the sympathetic.
The parasympathetic system predominates in restful conditions,
and is concerned with conservation and the routine vegetative functions —
digestion, excretion and the restoration of the body's reserves — rather than with
emergency action; its effects tend to be more discrete and localised than the
diffuse sympathetic discharge.
Its effects on the principal systems are: on the heart, a slowing of the rate,
through the vagus; on the lungs, constriction of the bronchi and increased
secretion; on the eyes, constriction of the pupil and accommodation for near
vision; on the gut, the stimulation of its motility and secretions,
promoting digestion; on the bladder, the promotion of its emptying;
and the stimulation of glandular secretions, such as salivation.
There is no parasympathetic supply to most blood vessels or to the sweat glands,
and it has little metabolic mobilising role.
The actions are mediated by acetylcholine on muscarinic receptors.
So the parasympathetic system, predominating in rest,
produces the rest-and-digest pattern: slowing the heart through the vagus,
constricting the bronchi and pupils,
stimulating the gut's motility and secretions and bladder emptying,
and promoting glandular secretion — the routine, restorative functions,
more discrete than the sympathetic,
mediated by acetylcholine on muscarinic receptors; broadly opposing the sympathetic.
Describe the concept of autonomic tone and the dual control of organs.
Most organs under autonomic control receive both sympathetic and parasympathetic
innervation, and the idea of autonomic tone — the continuous background activity of
the system — is important for understanding how the autonomic system achieves fine,
bidirectional control, so it is worth describing.
Many organs receive a dual innervation, from both divisions,
which usually have opposing effects — as on the heart,
where the sympathetic accelerates and the parasympathetic slows.
The autonomic nervous system is not normally either off or fully on,
but maintains a continuous background level of activity — autonomic tone — in both
divisions.
This tonic activity means that the control can be exerted in both directions by
varying the balance: an organ can be driven one way by increasing one division and
decreasing the other.
For example, the heart rate at rest reflects a balance,
with a dominant parasympathetic (vagal) tone slowing it below its intrinsic rate;
the rate can be increased either by increasing sympathetic activity or by
withdrawing vagal tone, and slowed by the reverse.
This dual, tonically-active, opposing control allows fine and rapid adjustment in
both directions. Not all organs are dually innervated — the blood vessels are
controlled chiefly by varying sympathetic tone.
So most organs receive a dual, usually opposing, innervation from both divisions,
and the autonomic system maintains a continuous background tone in each;
control being exerted by shifting the balance — as the heart rate is set by the
balance of sympathetic and dominant vagal tone and altered by adjusting either —
allowing fine, rapid, bidirectional control; while some effectors,
such as the vessels, are controlled by varying a single division's tone.
Pull it together: how does the autonomic nervous system maintain the internal
environment?
I would draw it together around the autonomic nervous system as the motor arm of
homeostasis — the system through which the nervous system regulates the internal
environment automatically, integrating the two divisions to match the body's state
to its needs.
The system controls the involuntary effectors — the heart, vessels, airways, gut,
bladder and glands — through its two divisions,
with their characteristic two-neuron,
ganglionic arrangement and their transmitters:
acetylcholine at all ganglia and at the parasympathetic effectors on muscarinic
receptors, and noradrenaline at the sympathetic effectors on adrenoceptors.
The two divisions are broadly opposing and serve different overall states:
the sympathetic, diffusely organised,
mobilises the body for action — fight or flight; the parasympathetic,
more discrete, governs rest, digestion and restoration.
Most organs receive both, under a continuous tone,
so that control can be exerted finely in both directions by shifting the balance.
The system operates automatically, driven by reflexes — such as the baroreflex
controlling the circulation — and by the hypothalamus and higher centres,
integrating autonomic, endocrine and behavioural responses.
So the autonomic nervous system maintains the internal environment as the motor arm
of homeostasis: regulating the involuntary effectors through its two opposing
divisions — the sympathetic mobilising for action,
the parasympathetic governing rest and restoration — with dual,
tonic control allowing fine bidirectional adjustment,
driven by reflexes and the hypothalamus;
the automatic regulation of the circulation,
the viscera and the glands that maintains homeostasis.
Describe the baroreceptor reflex in full.
The baroreceptor reflex is the most important of the autonomic reflexes controlling
the circulation, providing the rapid,
moment-to-moment regulation of the arterial blood pressure,
and a full account of it draws together the autonomic control of the cardiovascular
system.
The reflex regulates the arterial pressure by negative feedback.
Its receptors are the baroreceptors — stretch receptors in the walls of the carotid
sinus and the aortic arch — which sense the arterial pressure by the stretch it
produces; the higher the pressure, the more they are stretched and the more they
fire.
Their afferents run to the cardiovascular centres in the medulla.
There, the information is integrated and the autonomic outflow adjusted.
When the pressure rises, the increased baroreceptor firing causes the medulla to
reduce the sympathetic outflow and increase the parasympathetic, vagal, outflow;
this slows the heart, reduces its force, and dilates the vessels,
so lowering the pressure back towards normal.
When the pressure falls, the reduced baroreceptor firing causes the opposite —
increased sympathetic and reduced vagal activity, raising the heart rate,
force and vascular tone, restoring the pressure.
So the reflex opposes changes in the arterial pressure in both directions.
It is responsible for the rapid buffering of the blood pressure — for instance,
on standing, preventing a fall — and it is depressed by anaesthesia,
contributing to cardiovascular instability.
So the baroreceptor reflex regulates the arterial pressure by negative feedback:
the baroreceptors of the carotid sinus and aortic arch sensing the pressure,
and the medullary centres adjusting the autonomic outflow — a rise in pressure
increasing vagal and reducing sympathetic activity to lower it,
and a fall doing the reverse; the rapid buffer of the blood pressure,
depressed by anaesthesia — the chief autonomic reflex controlling the circulation.
Describe the adrenal medulla and the circulating catecholamines.
The adrenal medulla is a specialised part of the sympathetic nervous system that
releases catecholamines into the blood as hormones,
and an understanding of it complements the account of the sympathetic nerves,
since the circulating and the neural sympathetic systems act together.
The adrenal medulla is, in effect, a modified sympathetic ganglion:
its cells are the equivalent of postganglionic sympathetic neurons, but,
instead of having axons that innervate effectors,
they release their products into the bloodstream as hormones.
Like the sympathetic ganglia, it is supplied by preganglionic sympathetic fibres,
releasing acetylcholine onto nicotinic receptors,
which stimulate the medullary cells to secrete.
The medulla secretes catecholamines into the blood — chiefly adrenaline,
with some noradrenaline.
These circulate and act on the adrenoceptors throughout the body,
reinforcing and prolonging the effects of the sympathetic nerves,
and reaching tissues that are not directly innervated.
The adrenaline, in particular, has powerful metabolic and cardiovascular effects,
mobilising energy and supporting the circulation.
The adrenal medulla is activated as part of the sympathetic response to stress,
exertion and emergency — so the neural and the hormonal sympathetic outputs act
together in the fight-or-flight response.
So the adrenal medulla is a modified sympathetic ganglion,
supplied by preganglionic fibres releasing acetylcholine on nicotinic receptors,
which secretes catecholamines — chiefly adrenaline — into the blood as hormones;
these circulate to act on adrenoceptors throughout the body,
reinforcing and extending the sympathetic effects and reaching uninnervated
tissues, activated with the sympathetic nerves in stress — the hormonal arm of the
sympathetic system.
Describe the adrenoceptor subtypes and their effects.
The effects of the sympathetic system and of the catecholamines depend on which
adrenoceptors are activated, and a knowledge of the adrenoceptor subtypes and their
effects is essential, both to understand sympathetic function and because so many
drugs act on these receptors.
The adrenoceptors are the receptors for noradrenaline and adrenaline;
they are metabotropic, G-protein-coupled receptors, divided into two main classes,
alpha and beta, each with subtypes, which differ in their distribution and effects.
The alpha-one receptors, on the vascular smooth muscle,
mediate vasoconstriction — the principal action raising the blood pressure;
they also contract other smooth muscle.
The alpha-two receptors have presynaptic and central actions,
including the feedback inhibition of noradrenaline release and central effects
exploited by the alpha-two agonists used in anaesthesia for sedation.
The beta-one receptors, predominant in the heart,
mediate the increase in heart rate and force.
The beta-two receptors, on the smooth muscle of the bronchi, vessels and elsewhere,
mediate relaxation — bronchodilatation and some vasodilatation — and metabolic
effects.
The beta-three receptors have metabolic roles.
The different tissue distributions explain the patterns of sympathetic effect,
and the selectivity of drugs — the beta-blockers,
the selective beta-two agonists for asthma,
the alpha agonists and antagonists — follows from these subtypes.
So the adrenoceptors are the alpha-one, mediating vasoconstriction; the alpha-two,
mediating presynaptic feedback and central sedation; the beta-one,
mediating the cardiac stimulation; the beta-two,
mediating bronchodilatation and vasodilatation; and the beta-three,
metabolic — their distributions explaining the sympathetic effects and the actions
of the many drugs acting on them, knowledge essential to autonomic pharmacology.
Describe the muscarinic receptor subtypes and the effects of their activation and
blockade.
The effects of the parasympathetic system,
and of cholinergic drugs acting at the effectors,
are mediated by the muscarinic acetylcholine receptors,
and an understanding of these, and of the consequences of their blockade,
is important in anaesthesia, where antimuscarinic drugs are used.
The muscarinic receptors are the receptors for acetylcholine at the parasympathetic
effectors, and at the sympathetically-innervated sweat glands;
they are metabotropic, G-protein-coupled receptors,
with several subtypes distributed in different tissues.
Their activation, by the parasympathetic acetylcholine or by cholinergic drugs,
produces the parasympathetic effects: on the heart, slowing;
on the smooth muscle of the gut and bladder, contraction and increased motility;
on the bronchi, constriction; on the glands, increased secretion — salivation,
lacrimation and others; and on the eye, pupillary constriction.
Their blockade, by the antimuscarinic drugs such as atropine,
produces the opposite — the antimuscarinic effects:
a tachycardia from the loss of vagal slowing; a drying of the secretions;
relaxation of the gut and bladder smooth muscle; bronchodilatation;
pupillary dilatation; and central effects.
These antimuscarinic effects are exploited in anaesthesia — to increase the heart
rate, to dry secretions, and to block unwanted muscarinic effects of other drugs —
and also cause the side effects of many drugs with antimuscarinic actions.
So the muscarinic receptors mediate the parasympathetic effects at the effectors —
slowing the heart, contracting gut and bladder smooth muscle, constricting bronchi,
increasing secretions, constricting the pupil;
their blockade by atropine and other antimuscarinics producing tachycardia,
drying of secretions, smooth-muscle relaxation,
bronchodilatation and pupillary dilatation — effects exploited in anaesthesia and
causing drug side effects, knowledge important to autonomic pharmacology.
Describe ganglionic transmission and its modulation.
The transmission through the autonomic ganglia,
where the preganglionic neuron synapses on the postganglionic,
is a key step in the autonomic pathway,
and although its basic transmitter is simple,
it is more complex than a simple relay, so it is worth describing.
The basic transmission at the autonomic ganglion,
in both the sympathetic and parasympathetic divisions,
is by acetylcholine released from the preganglionic terminal acting on nicotinic
acetylcholine receptors on the postganglionic neuron;
this produces a fast excitatory postsynaptic potential which, if sufficient,
triggers an action potential in the postganglionic neuron — the principal,
fast transmission.
However, the ganglion is not merely a relay: the transmission can be modulated,
allowing some integration.
Besides the fast nicotinic transmission, there are slower potentials,
mediated by muscarinic receptors and by peptides,
which modulate the excitability of the postganglionic neuron and so the ease of
transmission. There is also some convergence and divergence within the ganglion.
This modulation allows the ganglion to do more than relay,
adjusting the gain of transmission. The ganglionic nicotinic receptors can be
blocked by ganglion-blocking drugs,
which block all autonomic transmission — historically used but with widespread
effects.
So ganglionic transmission is, basically,
by acetylcholine on nicotinic receptors producing a fast excitatory potential that
relays the signal to the postganglionic neuron, in both divisions;
but it is modulated by slower muscarinic and peptidergic potentials adjusting the
postganglionic excitability, so the ganglion integrates rather than merely relays;
and the nicotinic transmission can be blocked by ganglion-blocking drugs — a key
step in the autonomic pathway, more than a simple relay.
Describe the enteric nervous system.
The gut possesses its own extensive intrinsic nervous system — the enteric nervous
system — which is sometimes considered a third division of the autonomic nervous
system, and an understanding of it is worth having,
as it controls the gut with considerable independence.
The enteric nervous system is the intrinsic nervous system of the gastrointestinal
tract — a large network of neurons,
arranged in plexuses within the wall of the gut along its length,
containing very many neurons, comparable in number to the spinal cord.
It is remarkable for its independence:
it can control many of the functions of the gut — the motility,
the secretions and the local blood flow — largely on its own,
through its own sensory neurons, interneurons and motor neurons,
organising the reflexes that propel and mix the gut contents and control secretion,
even when separated from the central nervous system.
For this reason it is sometimes called a second brain.
It is, however, modulated by the autonomic nervous system:
the parasympathetic and sympathetic supplies influence and adjust its activity —
the parasympathetic generally promoting, and the sympathetic generally inhibiting,
the gut functions — integrating the gut's activity with the needs of the body as a
whole.
It uses a wide variety of neurotransmitters.
So the enteric nervous system is the extensive intrinsic nervous system of the gut,
a network of plexuses with very many neurons, which controls the gut's motility,
secretion and blood flow largely independently through its own reflex circuits — a
second brain — while being modulated by the parasympathetic and sympathetic
supplies that integrate its activity with the body's needs;
the intrinsic nervous control of the gut,
sometimes considered a third autonomic division.
Describe the autonomic control of the bladder.
The control of the bladder is a clear and clinically important example of autonomic
function, involving both divisions and the somatic system under reflex and
voluntary control, so it is worth describing in detail.
The bladder has two main functions — the storage and the periodic expulsion of
urine — controlled by a combination of autonomic and somatic innervation.
The detrusor, the smooth muscle of the bladder wall,
and the internal sphincter are under autonomic control;
the external sphincter is striated muscle under somatic, voluntary control.
During storage, the bladder must relax to accommodate filling while the sphincters
stay closed: this is achieved by the sympathetic supply,
which relaxes the detrusor and contracts the internal sphincter,
and the somatic supply, which keeps the external sphincter closed;
the parasympathetic is quiet.
During voiding, the reverse occurs: the parasympathetic supply is activated,
contracting the detrusor and relaxing the internal sphincter,
while the somatic supply relaxes the external sphincter, allowing emptying.
The switch between storage and voiding is organised by the micturition reflex,
with its centre in the sacral cord, coordinated by a centre in the brainstem,
and brought under voluntary control by the brain,
which decides when voiding is appropriate.
So the bladder is controlled by the sympathetic supply,
promoting storage by relaxing the detrusor and closing the internal sphincter;
the parasympathetic supply, promoting voiding by contracting the detrusor and
opening the internal sphincter; and the somatic supply to the voluntary external
sphincter; coordinated by the micturition reflex in the sacral cord and the
brainstem, under voluntary control — a clear example of autonomic and somatic
integration, of clinical importance.
Describe the synthesis, release and termination of action of noradrenaline at the
sympathetic terminal.
The handling of noradrenaline at the sympathetic nerve terminal — its synthesis,
release and the termination of its action — is worth detailing,
both for understanding sympathetic transmission and because many drugs act at these
steps.
Noradrenaline is synthesised within the sympathetic nerve terminal from the amino
acid tyrosine, through a series of enzymatic steps — tyrosine to dopa, to dopamine,
and then to noradrenaline — and is stored in vesicles.
When the action potential arrives, calcium enters and triggers the release of the
noradrenaline by exocytosis into the synaptic cleft,
where it acts on the adrenoceptors of the effector,
and on presynaptic alpha-two autoreceptors that provide feedback inhibition of
further release.
The action is then terminated chiefly by reuptake:
the noradrenaline is actively transported back into the nerve terminal by a
specific transporter — uptake-one — which is the principal mechanism,
the recaptured transmitter being re-stored or metabolised;
some is taken up by other tissues.
The noradrenaline is metabolised by two enzymes — monoamine oxidase,
within the terminal, and catechol-O-methyltransferase.
Many drugs act at these steps: some block the reuptake, prolonging the action;
some affect the synthesis, storage or release;
and the metabolising enzymes are inhibited by certain drugs.
So noradrenaline is synthesised from tyrosine in the terminal and stored in
vesicles, released by calcium-triggered exocytosis to act on the effector
adrenoceptors and presynaptic autoreceptors,
and its action terminated chiefly by reuptake into the terminal by a specific
transporter, with metabolism by monoamine oxidase and catechol-O-methyltransferase
— steps important in transmission and as targets of many drugs.
Describe the oculocardiac and other autonomic reflexes of relevance to anaesthesia.
Several autonomic reflexes are of particular relevance to anaesthesia,
because they can be provoked during surgery and cause sudden cardiovascular
changes, and the oculocardiac reflex is the classic example,
so it is worth describing these.
These reflexes typically have a sensory afferent provoked by surgical stimulation
and a vagal efferent producing a sudden bradycardia.
The oculocardiac reflex is provoked by pressure on, or traction of,
the eyeball or the extraocular muscles — as during eye surgery — which,
through the trigeminal afferent and the vagal efferent,
causes a sudden bradycardia, and sometimes other arrhythmias or asystole;
it is recognised, and managed by stopping the stimulus, and, if needed,
an antimuscarinic such as atropine.
Similar vagally-mediated reflex bradycardias can be provoked by traction on other
structures, such as the peritoneum or the mesentery during abdominal surgery,
and by pressure in the neck.
The Bezold-Jarisch reflex is a cardiac reflex,
provoked by certain stimuli in the heart, causing bradycardia,
vasodilatation and hypotension, implicated in some episodes of profound hypotension
and bradycardia.
The laryngeal reflexes, provoked by airway stimulation,
can cause laryngospasm and cardiovascular changes.
So the autonomic reflexes relevant to anaesthesia include the oculocardiac reflex —
bradycardia from pressure or traction on the eye,
via the trigeminal afferent and vagal efferent,
managed by stopping the stimulus and giving atropine;
similar vagal bradycardias from traction on the peritoneum or mesentery;
the Bezold-Jarisch reflex causing bradycardia and hypotension;
and the airway reflexes — reflexes that can cause sudden cardiovascular changes
during surgery, important to recognise and treat.
Describe the actions of drugs on the autonomic nervous system.
The autonomic nervous system is a major target of drugs,
both those used to manipulate it deliberately and those whose autonomic actions are
side effects, and an understanding of the sites at which drugs act follows from the
autonomic transmission, so it is worth drawing together.
Drugs act at every step of autonomic transmission.
At the sympathetic effector: the sympathomimetics, directly or indirectly,
activate the adrenoceptors — such as the vasopressors and inotropes used in
anaesthesia — while the adrenoceptor antagonists block them — the alpha- and
beta-blockers used for hypertension and other conditions.
At the parasympathetic effector: the cholinergic drugs activate the muscarinic
receptors, while the antimuscarinics, such as atropine,
block them — used to increase the heart rate and dry secretions.
At the noradrenergic terminal, drugs affect the synthesis, storage,
release and reuptake of noradrenaline. At the ganglia,
the ganglion-blockers block transmission.
The enzymes are targeted: the anticholinesterases,
by preventing the breakdown of acetylcholine,
enhance cholinergic transmission — used to reverse neuromuscular block and in other
conditions; and the monoamine oxidase inhibitors affect noradrenaline metabolism.
Many drugs used for other purposes have autonomic actions as side effects.
So drugs act on the autonomic system at every step:
activating or blocking the adrenoceptors — the sympathomimetics and adrenoceptor
blockers; activating or blocking the muscarinic receptors — the cholinergics and
antimuscarinics; affecting noradrenaline handling; blocking the ganglia;
and inhibiting the enzymes — the anticholinesterases and monoamine oxidase
inhibitors; a major field of pharmacology following from the autonomic
transmission, central to anaesthetic practice.
Describe autonomic neuropathy and its relevance to anaesthesia.
Damage to the autonomic nerves — autonomic neuropathy — impairs the autonomic
control of the body's functions, and it is of particular relevance to anaesthesia,
since it impairs the cardiovascular responses on which stability under anaesthesia
depends, so it is worth describing.
Autonomic neuropathy is damage to the autonomic nerves,
occurring in a number of conditions,
most commonly as a complication of long-standing diabetes,
and also in other neuropathies and diseases.
It impairs the autonomic reflexes and the autonomic control of the affected systems.
The cardiovascular effects are the most important for anaesthesia:
the impairment of the baroreflex and the sympathetic control of the circulation
means that the patient cannot mount the normal compensatory responses to the
cardiovascular challenges of anaesthesia — to hypotension, to blood loss,
to changes of posture — so they are prone to marked cardiovascular instability,
with exaggerated falls in blood pressure and an impaired heart-rate response;
there may be a resting tachycardia from vagal damage,
and a risk of sudden arrhythmias.
Other effects include impaired gastric emptying — increasing the risk of aspiration
— impaired temperature regulation, and a blunting of the responses to
hypoglycaemia. The recognition of autonomic neuropathy before anaesthesia allows
anticipation and careful management.
So autonomic neuropathy, most often from diabetes,
impairs the autonomic reflexes and control;
its cardiovascular effects being most important for anaesthesia — impairing the
compensatory responses to hypotension, blood loss and posture,
causing marked instability, with impaired gastric emptying and temperature control
— so its recognition allows anticipation and careful management;
an important condition for the anaesthetist.
Describe the chemoreceptor reflex and its autonomic effects.
The chemoreceptor reflex, although primarily concerned with the control of
breathing, has important autonomic cardiovascular effects,
and it is worth describing alongside the baroreflex as a reflex influencing the
autonomic outflow.
The peripheral chemoreceptors, in the carotid and aortic bodies,
sense the arterial oxygen, carbon dioxide and pH,
responding particularly to a fall in oxygen.
Their primary role is in the control of ventilation,
which they stimulate when the oxygen falls.
But they also have autonomic, cardiovascular effects: their stimulation,
by hypoxia, activates the sympathetic outflow to the circulation,
causing vasoconstriction and a rise in blood pressure — a response that helps to
maintain the perfusion of vital organs during hypoxia.
There is also a direct effect tending to slow the heart,
though this is normally overridden by the effects of the accompanying increase in
breathing, which tends to raise the heart rate;
the net cardiovascular effect depends on the circumstances.
In severe hypoxia, and when breathing cannot increase,
the chemoreceptor reflex can produce a marked sympathetic vasoconstriction and,
sometimes, a profound bradycardia. The reflex interacts with the baroreflex and the
other cardiovascular reflexes.
So the chemoreceptor reflex, through the peripheral chemoreceptors sensing chiefly
a fall in oxygen, primarily stimulates ventilation,
but also has autonomic cardiovascular effects — activating the sympathetic outflow
to cause vasoconstriction and raise the blood pressure,
helping to maintain vital-organ perfusion in hypoxia,
with a variable effect on heart rate;
a reflex influencing the autonomic outflow alongside the baroreflex,
of importance in hypoxia.
Describe the autonomic control of thermoregulation.
The regulation of body temperature depends importantly on the autonomic nervous
system, which provides several of the effector responses,
so the autonomic contribution to thermoregulation is worth describing as an example
of autonomic homeostatic control.
Body temperature is regulated by a control system,
with its centre in the hypothalamus,
which senses the temperature and drives the responses that defend it;
several of these responses are autonomic.
In response to cold, to conserve and generate heat,
the sympathetic nervous system drives cutaneous vasoconstriction,
reducing the blood flow to the skin and so the loss of heat from the body surface;
and it stimulates, through the adrenal medulla and directly,
metabolic heat production, including the heat production of brown fat in those who
have it.
Shivering, a somatic response, is also driven by the hypothalamus.
In response to heat, to lose heat, the sympathetic drive to the skin vessels is
withdrawn, allowing cutaneous vasodilatation,
which increases the skin blood flow and the loss of heat;
and the sympathetic cholinergic supply to the sweat glands is activated,
producing sweating, the evaporation of which cools the body.
So the autonomic system, directed by the hypothalamus,
provides key thermoregulatory effectors: in the cold,
sympathetic cutaneous vasoconstriction to conserve heat and the stimulation of
metabolic heat production; and in the heat,
cutaneous vasodilatation by withdrawing sympathetic tone,
and sweating through the sympathetic cholinergic supply,
to lose heat — the autonomic contribution to thermoregulation,
an example of its homeostatic control,
of relevance to temperature disturbances under anaesthesia.
Describe the co-transmitters of the autonomic nervous system.
Although the classical autonomic transmitters are acetylcholine and noradrenaline,
the autonomic nerves also release other substances as co-transmitters,
and an awareness of these gives a more complete and accurate picture of autonomic
transmission.
The classical scheme — acetylcholine at the ganglia and the parasympathetic
effectors, noradrenaline at the sympathetic effectors — remains the foundation,
but it is now known that the autonomic nerves frequently release additional
transmitters alongside the classical one, co-transmission,
broadening their signalling.
Several co-transmitters are recognised. Adenosine triphosphate is co-released with
noradrenaline by many sympathetic nerves, contributing to their effects,
particularly a fast component of the response of some smooth muscle.
Neuropeptide Y is co-released with noradrenaline by sympathetic nerves,
modulating the response, often producing a slow, prolonged vasoconstriction.
Vasoactive intestinal peptide is co-released with acetylcholine by some
parasympathetic nerves, contributing to vasodilatation and secretion.
Nitric oxide acts as a transmitter of certain autonomic nerves, mediating,
for instance, the relaxation of some smooth muscle.
These co-transmitters, released along with the classical transmitter,
often with different time-courses, broaden and modulate the autonomic effects,
and account for components of autonomic responses not explained by the classical
transmitters alone.
So the autonomic nerves release co-transmitters alongside the classical
acetylcholine and noradrenaline: adenosine triphosphate and neuropeptide Y with
noradrenaline in sympathetic nerves,
vasoactive intestinal peptide with acetylcholine in some parasympathetic nerves,
and nitric oxide as a transmitter of certain nerves;
these broadening and modulating the autonomic effects — a more complete picture of
autonomic transmission than the classical scheme alone.
Thank you. An excellent and complete account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, The autonomic nervous system controls involuntary effectors (cardiac/smooth
muscle, glands) to regulate the internal environment,
via two divisions (sympathetic, parasympathetic) and a two-neuron pathway:
preganglionic → ganglion → postganglionic → effector (plus the enteric system in
the gut).
Second, Anatomy: sympathetic = thoracolumbar outflow,
ganglia near the cord (sympathetic chains) → short preganglionic/long
postganglionic fibres, allowing diffuse discharge (adrenal medulla = modified
ganglion).
Parasympathetic = craniosacral outflow (vagus + sacral),
ganglia in/near effectors → long preganglionic/short postganglionic,
allowing discrete action.
Third, Transmitters/receptors: ALL ganglia — acetylcholine on nicotinic receptors;
parasympathetic effector — acetylcholine on muscarinic receptors;
sympathetic effector — noradrenaline on alpha/beta adrenoceptors (EXCEPT
cholinergic sweat glands); adrenal medulla releases adrenaline/noradrenaline into
the blood.
Fourth, Sympathetic (fight-or-flight, activated in stress/exertion):
↑ heart rate and force, overall vasoconstriction with redistribution and ↑ BP,
bronchodilation, pupil dilation, energy mobilisation, gut/bladder inhibition.
Parasympathetic (rest-and-digest): vagal slowing of the heart, bronchoconstriction,
pupil constriction/accommodation, ↑ gut motility/secretion, bladder emptying,
glandular secretion — broadly opposing.
Fifth, Most organs receive dual, usually opposing,
innervation under continuous autonomic tone,
so control is exerted by shifting the balance (e.g.
resting heart rate set by dominant vagal tone; altered by changing
Thank you. That concludes the station.